Tuples (#1)
BillWagner/csharplang: proposals/csharp-7.0/tuples.md

    ;
```

A tuple literal is *target typed* whenever possible; that is, its type is determined by the context in which it is used.

> **ISSUE:** If the term target-typed is specific to this context, we probably need a complete definition somewhere.

Reviewer: We used the term "implicitly typed", and defined it for the same concept in statements, where we specify implicitly typed local variables (`var` declarations).

there is some discussion that dances around the concept in integral and floating-point literals, but I did not see a definition.

Author: I beefed up the text to say,

>A tuple literal is implicitly typed; that is, its type is determined by the context in which it is used, referred to as the *target*. Each element *expression* in a tuple literal shall have a value that can be converted implicitly to its corresponding target element type.

and added the following examples showing acceptable and unacceptable implicit conversions:

```csharp
(int, double) t3 = (0, 2);    // infer tuple type (int, double) from values; can implicitly convert int to double
(int, double) t4 = (0.0, 2);  // Error: can't implicitly convert double to int
```

\[Example:
```csharp
var t1 = (0, 2);              // infer tuple type from values
var t2 = (sum: 0, count: 1);  // infer tuple type from names and values
```
end example\]

A tuple literal has a "conversion from expression" to any tuple type having the same number of elements, as long as each of the element expressions of the tuple literal has an implicit conversion to the type of the corresponding element of the tuple type.

\[Example:
```csharp
(string name, byte age) t = (null, 5); // OK: the expressions null and 5 convert to string and byte, respectively
```
end example\]

In cases where a tuple literal is not part of a conversion, it acquires its *natural type*, which means a tuple type where the element types are the types of the constituent expressions, in lexical order. Since not all expressions have types, not all tuple literals have a natural type either:

> **ISSUE:** Is natural type specific to tuples? Need we say more about this term?

Reviewer: Yes, we should define this term.

Author: I put the following definition in Tuple types|General:

>A tuple's ***natural type*** is the combination of its element types, in lexical order, and element names, if they exist.

and then made uses link there.

Once we decide on what to do about "arity", we could rewrite the above definition in terms of that.

Reviewer: Good plan.

    ;
```

A ***tuple*** is an anonymous data structure type that contains an ordered sequence of two or more ***elements***. Each element is public. Each unique, ordered combination of element types designates a distinct tuple type.

An element in a tuple is accessed using the [member-access operator `.`](../../spec/expressions.md#Member-access).

Given the following,

```csharp
(int code, string message) pair1 = (3, "hello");
System.Console.WriteLine("first = {0}, second = {1}", pair1.code, pair1.message);
```

the syntax `(int code, string message)` declares a tuple type having two elements, each with the given type and name.

> As shown, a tuple can be initialized using a [tuple literal](../../spec/lexical-structure.md#Tuple-literals).

Reviewer: The referenced section for the link doesn't exist yet. Should we refer to the addition described in this document for now?

Author: I changed the link to "XXX", which I'm using as a placeholder for future links.

A tuple type shall behave exactly like its underlying type. The only additional enhancement in the tuple type case is the ability to provide a more expressive name for each element.

\[Example:
```csharp
var t1 = (sum: 0, 1);
t1.sum   = 1;		// access the first element by its declared name
t1.Item1 = 1;		// access the first element by its underlying name
t1.Item2 = 3;		// access the second element by its underlying name

System.ValueTuple<int, int> vt = t1;	// identity conversion

 var t2 = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9);	// t2 is a System.ValueTuple<T1, T2, T3,..., T7, TRest>
 var t3 = t4.Rest;						// t3 is a (int, int); that is, a System.ValueTuple<T1, T2>
 System.Console.WriteLine("Item9 = {0}", t1.Item9);	// outputs 9 even though no such name Item9 exists!
```
end example\]

> **ISSUE:** Where will the type System.Value be defined (and its public names listed)?

Reviewer: I think this should be in the annex where we specify the necessary standard library.

Author: I see that unlike the published standard, the GitHub-based spec does *not* have this annex. In any event, I added a new section to the proposal with definitions for this family of types for when such an annex is created.

I see that V7.3 will support `==`/`!=` on tuples, and right now, `System.ValueTuple.Equals` exists. As such, I added a definition for tuple equality, and I posed added issue re relational semantics based on `System.ValueTuple.CompareTo's` behavior.

Reviewer: Right on both counts.

\[Example:
```csharp
var t =  (ToString: 0, GetHashCode: 1);	// Error: names match underlying member names
var t1 = (Item1: 0, Item2: 1);			// OK
var t2 = (misc: 0, Item1: 1);			// Error: "Item1" used in a wrong position
```
end example\]

#### Element names and overloading, overriding, and hiding

When tuple element names are used in overridden signatures or implementations of interface methods, tuple element names in parameter and return types shall be preserved. It is an error for the same generic interface to be inherited or implemented twice with identity-convertible type arguments that have conflicting tuple element names.

For the purpose of overloading, overriding and hiding, tuples of the same types and lengths as well as their underlying ValueTuple types shall be considered equivalent. All other differences are immaterial. When overriding a member it is permitted to use tuple types with the same names or names different than in the base member.

> **ISSUE:** Re the mention of "tuple length", which is not mentioned elsewhere; it seems to me that a tuple type includes an implied length based on the number of elements.

Reviewer: That's how I interpret it. This is the same as the *arity* term. We should standardize on *arity*, and define it.

Author: Done!

t2.moo = 1;
```
end example\]

> In teh case in which an element name at one position on one side of a conversion, and the same name at a different position on the other side, the copmpiler shall issue a warning.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
In the case in which an element name at one position on one side of a conversion, and the same name at a different position on the other side, the compiler shall issue a warning.
```

Author: Got it; that's probably my most common typing mistake!

Reviewer: me too.

```
end example\]

### Boxing conversions

> Add the following text to [Boxing conversions](../../spec/conversions.md#boxing-conversions) after the first paragraph:

Tuples have a boxing conversion. Importantly, the element names aren't part of the runtime representation of tuples, but are tracked only by the compiler. Thus, once element names have been "cast away", they cannot be recovered. In alignment with identity conversion, a boxed tuple unboxes to any tuple type that has the same element types in the same order.

### Tuple conversions

> Add this section after [Implicit enumeration conversions](../../spec/conversions.md#implicit-enumeration-conversions)

Tuple types and expressions support a variety of conversions by "lifting" conversions of the elements into overall *tuple conversion*. For the classification purpose, all element conversions are considered recursively. For example, to have an implicit conversion, all element expressions/types shall have implicit conversions to the corresponding element types.

Tuple conversions are *Standard Conversions* and therefore can stack with user-defined operators to form user-defined conversions.

> **ISSUE:** Is 'stack' a defined term in this context?

Reviewer: I don't think we've defined it. I'd prefer using different language in the previous sentence to introducing new terms. What are your thoughts?

Author: How about replacing "stack" with "combine" or "be combined"?

Reviewer: I think "be combined" would be best.

An implicit tuple conversion is a standard conversion. It applies between two tuple types of equal arity when there is any implicit conversion between each corresponding pair of types.

> **ISSUE:** Re 'arity' does this mean number of elements, with their types and names? In any event, perhaps we should define this in terms of tuples and consistently use it throughout, as in, "The arity of a tuple is ...".

Reviewer: *arity* means number of elements and their types. I don't think it includes names. We should verify that by looking at all uses.

Author: I defined "arity" in Tuple types|General, as follows:

>A tuple's ***arity*** is the combination of its element types, in lexical order; element names are *not* included.

and I reviewed the proposal, consistently using this term, as appropriate.

Having said that, my experience with using "tuple" has to do with counts only: the number of operands an operator takes or the number of arguments a function expects; type info does not enter into it. Yet, in the case of tuples, element type is significant. As such, like functions/methods, tuples really have "signatures", which capture both number and ordered type. Might we be able to use that term instead?

}
```

**ISSUE:** I think we need to say more about this code (which is not an example, but is intended to show/say just what is going on/needed).

> Overload resolution for `Deconstruct` methods considers only the arity of the `Deconstruct` method. If multiple `Deconstruct` methods of the same arity are accessible, the expression is ambiguous and a binding-time error shall occur.

Reviewer: Regarding the "arity" definition. This paragraph implies that names aren't part of "arity".

Author: Agreed!

1. Evaluate the LHS: Evaluate each of the expressions inside of it one by one, left to right, to yield side effects and establish a storage location for each.
1. Evaluate the RHS: Evaluate each of the expressions inside of it one by one, left to right to yield side effects
1. Convert each of the RHS expressions to the LHS types expected, one by one, left to right.
1. Assign each of the conversion results from Step 3 to the storage locations found in (???)

> **Note to reviewers**: I found this in the LDM notes for July 13-16, 2016. I don't think it is still accurate:

**ISSUE:** flesh out the following example

\[Example:
```csharp
string x;
byte y;

(x, y) = (y, x); // swap!
```
end example\]

A deconstructing assignment is a *statement-expression* whose type could be `void`.

### Additions to [Classes](../../spec/classes.md)

### Extension methods

> Add the following note to the end of the section on [extension methods](../../spec/classes.md#extension-methods):

[*Note*: Extension methods on a tuple type apply to tuples with different element names:

```csharp
static void M(this (int x, int y) t) { ... }

(int a, int b) t = ...;
t.M(); // Sure
```
*endnote*].

> **ISSUE:** Explain what the comment "Sure" means.

Reviewer: This should be saying that the extension method `M` is a candidate method, even though the tuple `t` has different element names (`a`, ` b`) than then formal parameter of M (`x`, `y`).

Author: OK; I added that explanation to the end of the Note.
